---
title:  "Lecture Notes: Just-in-time Return-oriented Programming"
date:   2020-04-22 09:00:00
categories: notes lecture
layout: post
---


In coarse-grained ASLR, only the base address of each region is randomized,
e.g., the code section starts at a different offset each time the program is
executed. If an attacker gains knowledge (via an information leak) of a single
address into a code region (say Libc) that is often sufficient to find the
location of all other interesting code locations in that region because the
relative offsets remain the same.  For instance, if the attacker learns the
runtime address of `printf` they can figure out the address of `system` by
adding an known offset. Caveat: this offset is only "known" if the attacker has
knowledge of and access to the version of libc running on the system---often
[not hard to satisfy this condition](https://libc.blukat.me/). 


**Fine-grained ASLR.** To combat these information leaks, many researchers have
proposed schemes to make ASLR more fine-grained. For example, a hypothetical
fine-grained scheme might:
 - randomize code at the function or basic block level,
 - swap registers used in instructions
 - swap instructions for equivalents

These transformations might be done statically at compile time, at program
start up, or dynamically rearrange during execution. Of course, the overhead of
these transformations are a concern, so most approaches fall into one of the
first two categories (compile time or load time).

**Is Software Secure Now?** Fine-grained ASLR removes the case where a single
leaked address is enough to construct a ROP-chain or execute a ret2libc attack.
However, Fine-grained ASLR schemes (up until 2013) didn't account for the fact
that, in many systems, **a single information leak can be exploited multiple
times.** This oversight is the intuition that drives the research we will talk
about today.

### Just-In-Time Code Reuse 

If an attacker can repeatedly leverage an information leak, they can
dynamically map out a significant portion of the code memory even in when
fine-grained ASLR is implemented. If they can map out the code memory, they can
dynamically examine that code to find new gadgets and construct a new ROP chain
on the fly. This attack is referred to as **just-in-time code reused** or
**jit-rop**.

The basic outline of the jit-rop is as follows:
 - the attacker finds an information leak
 - that information leak is repeated leverages to map memory
 - the mapped memory is analyzed to find useful code (api calls, gadgets)
 - the attacker compiles a ROP-chain using the useful code
 - the chain is inserted into memory and control-flow is redirected

Because all of these tasks are done just-in-time,  jit-rop attacks target
software that supports scripting, e.g., web browsers and PDF document viewer.
However, many of these steps are similar to what an attacker would do a basic
offline ROP attack; the only difference being that all of these steps are done
at runtime, e.g., running as javascript in the browser the attacker is trying
to exploit. 

**The Leak.** The first thing an attacker needs to execute a JIT-ROP attack is
an information leak that allows the attacker to read any arbitrary address in
memory and can be leveraged repeatedly. While this requirement might seem
unlikely, consider the following example. The attacker (more accurately, the
attacker's script):
 - creates an object with an exploitable buffer overflow,     
 - creates a string object,
 - those two objects are likely to be next to each other on the heap.
 - overflow the first object to modify the string object, setting the string
   object's size to be very very very large (think `2**32`)
 - now the attacker can effectively read arbitrary memory locations by reading
   character at offset X in the string. 

**Mapping Memory.** The challenge with mapping memory is that if the attacker
reads an unmapped address, the program will crash, and the attacker will lose
all progress because the next execution of the program with re-randomize
memory. Given this fact and that the vast majority of the virtual address space
is unmapped, it doesn't make sense for an attacker to just guess at an address
an hope they get lucky. 

However, if the attacker can somehow get a single pointer into code memory,
they instantly reveal an entire 4KB-aligned page of code memory that is
guaranteed to be mapped. Further, it is quite likely that the revealed code
page includes pointers to other code pages in memory, e.g., due to control-flow
instructions.

Going back to our previous web browser example, the attacker can throw a third
object on the stack (e.g., `CButtonLayout` contains some function pointers). If
that third object contains a code pointer, then the attacker  only needs to
read the object's value to get the needed first code pointer.  

**Linear-sweep Disassembly.** Even with a pointer in a code page, that page is
just a stream of bytes that the attacker needs to make sense of. Fortunately,
the attacker can use existing disassembly techniques to try to parse the bytes
into instructions. The most basic class of disassembly techniques is called
linear-sweep disassembly. The idea here is simple: start at the first byte and
try to interpret it as an instruction---remember instructions are
variable-length in x86. Move on to the next byte in the sequence and repeat the
process.

Caveat: compiler will often mix data in with instructions and if you try to
interpret data as instructions you'll get bad results and those bad results
may propagate.  

There is a lot of work in disassembly literature to address these problems, but
this paper relies on a simple heuristic approach: if the instruction is valid
throw it out (along with some of its neighbors because we probably got them
wrong too). So plenty of potential for optimization here, but the basic idea is
sufficient for a proof of concept.  

**How well does code page harvesting work?** In the simple example of Internet
Explorer with an initial code pointer from `CButtonLayout`, they were able to
discover 301 code pages from the IE process. 

Of course, the number of pages the attacker can map depends on where they
start. To test page harvesting from a variety of entry points, the authors ran
a number of applications, took a snapshot of the application's entire code
memory and then tested the number of reachable pages from any given starting
page. Results:
 - For Internet Explorer, over half of the potential starting pages allowed
   them to recover 300+ pages.
 - For Firefox and Adobe Acrobat, a quarter of starting pages allowed the
   authors to recover 1000+ pages.

Long story short, that is a lot of code pages to mine for gadgets. 

**Finding Useful Code.** Now that the attacker has recovered code from the
application, the next step to find useful gadgets and API calls in that code.  
Gadget finding is done using existing gadget finding approaches.

**API Calls.** The API calls here are important because they are the interface
between the process and the operating system and, as such, allow the attacker
to accomplish something interesting with the attack. In other words, executing
a bunch of arbitrary gadgets is cute, but it is not useful unless that attacker
can use those gadgets to do something useful like pop a shell.

In the  gadget chains we've discussed so far in this course, our API targets
are either system calls (via `int 0x80` or `syscall` instructions) or libc
functions (e.g., `system()`). The authors made a number of interesting
observations here (remember there is a windows focus to their work):
 1. attackers want to avoid syscalls because syscall numbers vary greatly
    between OS versions; thus, it is hard to make a one-size-fits-all exploit
that gets a wide range of vulnerable users.  
 2. common wisdom  is to use a `VirtualProtect` API call to change the page
    permissions to enable execution for more traditional shellcode, but it is
rare to find `VirtualProtect` callsites.  
 3. however, `LoadLibrary` and `GetProcAddress` callsites are common and those
    pair of functions can accomplish the same tasks as traditional shellcode. 

For reference, `LoadLibrary` will load a software module into the address space
(e.g., a DLL file) and `GetProcAddress` will give a pointer to a target
variable/function in the library. In the paper they used the following to
launch the calculator program:

```
// Pseudocode
LoadLibrary("kernel32")
GetProcAddress(k32, "WinExec") 
WinExec('calc')
```


**Building the ROP chain.** At this point, the attacker has mapped out a
significant number of code pages, disassembled them, and found a list of
addresses for potentially useful gadgets and API functions. The next step is to
take those building blocks and just-in-time compile them into a working ROP
chain that accomplishes the attacker's goal. Since the authors use existing
work for this step, so we won't go into detail.

**Hijacking Control-flow.** The final step is to redirect control flow to
execute the ROP chain. This requires another memory error that allows an
attacker to corrupt a code pointer and it's a process we should already be
familiar with. 

**Putting it all together.** It is important to reiterate that with a JIT-ROP
attack, typically all of these steps are done at runtime, inside of some script
running in the target application, e.g., javascript inside of the web browser. 
For their proof of concept, the authors wrote most of the code in C++ and used
LLVM to transform it into javascript. They then used that javascript to exploit
a real vulnerability in Internet Explorer (CVE-2012-1876).

### Discussion Questions

**What's the primary contribution of this paper?** I'd say two things: first
the observation that fine-grained ALSR makes the unfounded assumption that a
memory leak will only be used once; second, that a single pointer into a code
page gives you an entire 4KB page to find pointers to additional pages. Much of
the rest of the work is engineering, i.e., putting together components that
already exist. 

**How do we make ASLR better?** Well, one idea is to modify the code pages to
remove direct references to other code pages, i.e., prevent the mapping step.
Turns out (as discussed in the Isomeron paper) that there are other ways to
leak code pointers (e.g., through objects/function pointers on the heap/stack.
Alternatively, we can try to stymie the JIT disassembly through
anti-disassembly techniques. I don't know enough about the topic to really say
if this will work well or not. Finally, we can make it harder for the bad guy
to accomplish anything useful by removing API calls (e.g., can't use
`LoadLibrary` if it isn't in the program. Turns out this last approach is
essentially what Chrome does with its sandboxing.  


### For more inspiration

Lecture based on the paper ["Just-In-Time Code Reuse: On the Effectiveness of
Fine-Grained Address Space Layout
Randomization"](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.6023&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
by Snow et al.
